docs: Add document for vhost-user-net test with OVS/DPDK (#757)
cloud-hypervisor/cloud-hypervisor: docs/vhost-user-net-testing.md

> # Vhost-user-net

Reviewer: Need a better title

Author: Change it to be "How to test vhost-user net with OpenVSwitch/DPDK".

> The purpose of this document is to illustrate how to test vhost-user-net in cloud-hypervisor with OVS/DPDK as backend.

Reviewer: s/as backend/as the backend/

Author: change done!

## Framework

> It's a simple test to validate the communication between two virtual machine, connecting them to vhost-user ports respectively provided by `OVS/DPDK`.

Reviewer: is "vhost-user ports" the right terminology?

Author: Yes, I think so.

             |               |          |                                       |          |               |           
          +--+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--+        
          |  |                                       hugepages                                             |  |        
          |  +---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+  |        
          |                                                                                                   |        
          |                                              host                                                 |        
          |                                                                                                   |  
          +---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+        
```
## Prerequisites

Prior to running the test, the following steps need to be performed, [vhost-user-ovs-dpdk](https://wiki.qemu.org/Documentation/vhost-user-ovs-dpdk) is a good reference for detailing them.
- Enable hugepages

> - Install kernel-devel

Reviewer 2: I am using Ubuntu.  Looks like on Ubuntu system, there is no kernel-devel.  So we may need to let people know what system the document is for.

Author: Yes, right, I will add this point.

- Build DPDK from source
- Build OVS from source

> 

Reviewer: Is there not a docker container that does this?

Author: No, I do not try it in container, download the source code in local environment, it's  convenient for me to add debug info in source code while doing investigation. But it sounds good to run it in container for CI.

> - Build OVS from source

Reviewer 2: According to https://wiki.qemu.org/Documentation/vhost-user-ovs-dpdk, "With DPDK 16.07, you will need an out-of-tree patch as of 07/18/2016"
Do I still need to add the patch here?

Author: you could get a dpdk code base > 16.07

> 

Reviewer 2: It is good to add some detailed steps on how to achieve the above tasks.  Or add some useful links on how to do it. Looks like the document referred is a little bit old. I tried the steps according to the documents and run into the problem.

Author: As what we discussed through the mail, the qemu web page has redhat as an example for the installation, so please have a try on redhat and let me know what the problem you have.

Reviewer 2: oh, sorry, I could not find a redhat machine here.  But I can try it on Ubunutu machine basing on this document.  Is it helpful?  :)

## Test
The test runs with multiple queue (MQ) support enabled, using 2 pairs of TX/RX queues defined for both OVS and the virtual machine. Here are the details on how the test can be run.

_Setup OVS_

`ovs_test.sh` is created to setup and start OVS. OVS will provide the `dpdkvhostuser` backend running in server mode.
```bash
mkdir -p /var/run/openvswitch
modprobe openvswitch
killall ovsdb-server ovs-vswitchd
rm -f /var/run/openvswitch/vhost-user*
rm -f /etc/openvswitch/conf.db
export DB_SOCK=/var/run/openvswitch/db.sock
ovsdb-tool create /etc/openvswitch/conf.db /usr/share/openvswitch/vswitch.ovsschema
ovsdb-server --remote=punix:$DB_SOCK --remote=db:Open_vSwitch,Open_vSwitch,manager_options --pidfile --detach
ovs-vsctl --no-wait init
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:dpdk-lcore-mask=0xf
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:dpdk-socket-mem=1024
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:dpdk-init=true
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:pmd-cpu-mask=0xf

> ovs-vswitchd unix:$DB_SOCK --pidfile --detach --log-file=/var/log/openvswitch/ovs-vswitchd.log

Reviewer 2: this command failed on my machine because /var/log/openvswitch/ directory doesn't exist.

ovs-vsctl add-br ovsbr0 -- set bridge ovsbr0 datapath_type=netdev

> ovs-vsctl add-port ovsbr0 vhost-user1 -- set Interface vhost-user1 type=dpdkvhostuser

Reviewer 2: On my Ubunutu 18.04, run into below error
the output of running ovs_test.sh

+ ovs-vsctl add-br ovsbr0 -- set bridge ovsbr0 datapath_type=netdev
+ ovs-vsctl add-port ovsbr0 vhost-user1 -- set Interface vhost-user1 type=dpdkvhostuser
ovs-vsctl: Error detected while setting up 'vhost-user1': could not add network device vhost-user1 to ofproto (Invalid argument).  See ovs-vswitchd log for details.
ovs-vsctl: The default log directory is "/var/log/openvswitch".
+ ovs-vsctl add-port ovsbr0 vhost-user2 -- set Interface vhost-user2 type=dpdkvhostuser
ovs-vsctl: Error detected while setting up 'vhost-user2': could not add network device vhost-user2 to ofproto (Invalid argument).  See ovs-vswitchd log for details.

from /var/log/openvswitch/ovs-vswitchd.log 

2020-03-03T21:20:02.902Z|00105|netdev|WARN|vhost-user2: arguments provided to device that is not configurable
2020-03-03T21:20:02.902Z|00106|dpdk|ERR|MBUF: error setting mempool handler
2020-03-03T21:20:02.902Z|00107|netdev_dpdk|ERR|Failed to create mempool "ovse503631800021580262144" with a request of 262144 mbufs
2020-03-03T21:20:02.902Z|00108|netdev_dpdk|ERR|Failed to create memory pool for netdev vhost-user2, with MTU 1500 on socket 0: Invalid argument
2020-03-03T21:20:02.902Z|00109|dpif_netdev|ERR|Failed to set interface vhost-user2 new configuration
2020-03-03T21:20:02.903Z|00110|dpdk|INFO|VHOST_CONFIG: Linear buffers requested without external buffers, disabling host segmentation offloading support

The hugepage have been enabled 
 cat /proc/meminfo | grep Huge
AnonHugePages:         0 kB
ShmemHugePages:        0 kB
HugePages_Total:    2048
HugePages_Free:     1536
HugePages_Rsvd:        0
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:       2048 kB

The kernel cmd is set as：
cat /proc/cmdline 
BOOT_IMAGE=/boot/vmlinuz-4.15.0-88-generic root=UUID=eb27aca8-a201-4bb3-95fb-a1b2a55b9798 ro default_hugepagesz=2M hugepagesz=2M hugepages=2048

Author: could you share your script to start cloud-hypervisor vm?

Reviewer 2: I have no special script to start CLH. All the scripts are from yours. :) And I was blocked in this step, and have not reached the step to start VM.

Author: Ah, yes, you are still configuring OVS+DPDK environment. I have not tried ubuntu and did not encounter such issue, could you please ping me and provide your environment info if it's possible, then I can log on to have a look?

Author: I have no ubuntu at hand for a try :-)

Reviewer 3: I'd like to summarize the steps I used to try it on my Ubunutu 18.04 machine
1. OS System 18.04
2. DPDK: The latest git tree git://dpdk.org/dpdk
3. OVS: the latest git tree clone https://github.com/openvswitch/ovs
(Maybe I should use some specific release of these projects.)
4. Building DPDK:  Using the step in https://wiki.qemu.org/Documentation/vhost-user-ovs-dpdk recommend by this document. I added step "ldconfig /lib64" so OVS applications can locate DPDK library.
5. Building OVS: using exactly the same steps suggested in this document 
6. Enabling hugepage on host machine: I try to enable hugebage by editing the kernel booting cmdline suggested in this document and also tried to twist the /proc/sys/vm/*_hugepage_*. I think both of them works fine
7. ovs_test.sh, using almost the same shell script. I only add line "mkdir -p /var/log/openvswitch" in the beginning of the script to create the logging file directory.

I guess the problem may come from the below aspects:
1. The release of OVS and DPDK we should use. 
2. the proper way to install of DPDK library for OVS.
Just for your reference.
I hope that can help. :)
Thanks!

Author: As I have mentioned, the current doc is based on redhat machine. For how to install and configure OpenVswitch-DPDK on ubuntu server, I think you could refer to this page https://help.ubuntu.com/lts/serverguide/DPDK.html

Author: I will update the document with redhat specifies, once you complete the ubuntu steps, we could add the ubuntu part.

Reviewer 4: @bjzhjing please update the document by providing these two links you've been mentioning for Ubuntu machines. I think this will be enough for now.

Author: Add the two additional references, and update around.

> The purpose of this document is to illustrate how to test vhost-user-net in cloud-hypervisor with OVS/DPDK as backend.

Reviewer 4: Please add a title to this document.

### Framework

> It's just a basic function test to validate the communication between two virtual machines by connecting to vhost-user port respectively provided by OVS/DPDK.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's a simple test to validate the communication between two virtual machines, connecting them to vhost-user ports respectively provided by `OVS/DPDK`.
```

             +----+----------+          +-------------+-----------+-------------+          +----------+----+           
             |    |          |          |             |           |             |          |          |    |           
             |    |vhost-user|----------| vhost-user  |   ovs     | vhost-user  |----------|vhost-user|    |           
             |    |net device|          | port 1      |           | port 2      |          |net device|    |           
             |    |          |          |             |           |             |          |          |    |           
             |    +----------+          +-------------+-----------+-------------+          +----------+    |           
             |               |          |                                       |          |               |           
             |vm1            |          |                  dpdk                 |          |           vm2 |           
             |               |          |                                       |          |               |           
          +--+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--+        

>           |  |                                       hugepage                                              |  |        

Reviewer 4: s/hugepage/hugepages/

          |  +---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+  |        
          |                                                                                                   |        
          |                                              host                                                 |        
          |                                                                                                   |        
          +---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+        
```
### Prerequisites

> Prior to run the test, the following steps need to be done, [vhost-user-ovs-dpdk](https://wiki.qemu.org/Documentation/vhost-user-ovs-dpdk) is a good reference which tells how to do.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Prior to running the test, the following steps need to be performed, [vhost-user-ovs-dpdk](https://wiki.qemu.org/Documentation/vhost-user-ovs-dpdk) is a good reference for detailing them.
```

> - Enable hugepage

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Enable hugepages
```

- Install kernel-devel
- Build DPDK from source
- Build OVS from source

### Test

> The test will run with mq support enabled, 2 queue pairs defined for both OVS and virtual machine. Here is the details how we can run the test.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The test runs with multiqueue (MQ) support enabled, using 2 pairs of TX/RX queues defined for both OVS and the virtual machine. Here are the details on how the test can be run.
```

_Setup OVS_

> ovs_test.sh is created to setup and start OVS. OVS will provide the dpdkvhostuser type port which is as server mode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`ovs_test.sh` is created to setup and start OVS. OVS will provide the `dpdkvhostuser` backend running in server mode.
```

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```bash
```

> #!/bin/bash

Reviewer 4: I would remove this line.

Author: Remove "#!/bin/bash", is that what you mean?

mkdir -p /var/run/openvswitch
modprobe openvswitch
killall ovsdb-server ovs-vswitchd
rm -f /var/run/openvswitch/vhost-user*
rm -f /etc/openvswitch/conf.db
export DB_SOCK=/var/run/openvswitch/db.sock
ovsdb-tool create /etc/openvswitch/conf.db /usr/share/openvswitch/vswitch.ovsschema
ovsdb-server --remote=punix:$DB_SOCK --remote=db:Open_vSwitch,Open_vSwitch,manager_options --pidfile --detach
ovs-vsctl --no-wait init
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:dpdk-lcore-mask=0xf
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:dpdk-socket-mem=1024
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:dpdk-init=true
ovs-vsctl --no-wait set Open_vSwitch . other_config:pmd-cpu-mask=0xf
ovs-vswitchd unix:$DB_SOCK --pidfile --detach --log-file=/var/log/openvswitch/ovs-vswitchd.log
ovs-vsctl add-br ovsbr0 -- set bridge ovsbr0 datapath_type=netdev
ovs-vsctl add-port ovsbr0 vhost-user1 -- set Interface vhost-user1 type=dpdkvhostuser
ovs-vsctl add-port ovsbr0 vhost-user2 -- set Interface vhost-user2 type=dpdkvhostuser
ovs-vsctl set Interface vhost-user1 options:n_rxq=2
ovs-vsctl set Interface vhost-user2 options:n_rxq=2
```

> Run ovs_test.sh

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_Run ovs_test.sh_
```

```bash
./ovs_test.sh
```

_Launch the VMs_

> VMs will be as client to connect to the dpdkvhostuser port socket.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
VMs run in client mode. They connect to the socket created by the `dpdkvhostuser` backend.
```

```bash

> # From one terminal. Run as root, it's allowed to use tap interface without additional settings.

Reviewer 4: I'd prefer if you were mentioning that setting the right capabilities to the cloud-hypervisor binary will be enough. It's better if we avoid saying the VMM must be run as root.

> ./cloud-hypervisor/target/release/cloud-hypervisor \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
./cloud-hypervisor \
```

        --cpus boot=2 \
        --memory size=512M,file=/dev/hugepages   \

>         --kernel /home/cathy/tiger_lake/linux/vmlinux \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        --kernel vmlinux \
```

        --console off \

>         --serial tty \

Reviewer 4: No need for special handling here. Just remove those two lines to keep it simple. This means by default the VM will use `virtio-console`.

>         --cmdline "console=ttyS0 reboot=k panic=1 nomodules i8042.noaux i8042.nomux i8042.nopnp i8042.dumbkbd root=/dev/vda3" \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        --cmdline "reboot=k panic=1 nomodules i8042.noaux i8042.nomux i8042.nopnp i8042.dumbkbd root=/dev/vda3" \
```

>         --disk path=/home/cathy/clear-31890-kvm.img   \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        --disk path=clear-kvm.img   \
```

        --vhost-user-net "mac=52:54:00:02:d9:01,sock=/var/run/openvswitch/vhost-user1,num_queues=4" \

>         --rng

Reviewer 4: No need, it's always enabled by default.

> # From another terminal. Run as root, it's allowed to use tap interface without additional settings.

Reviewer 4: Same here.

./cloud-hypervisor/target/release/cloud-hypervisor \
        --cpus boot=2 \
        --memory size=512M,file=/dev/hugepages   \
        --kernel /home/cathy/tiger_lake/linux/vmlinux \
        --console off \
        --serial tty \
        --cmdline "console=ttyS0 reboot=k panic=1 nomodules i8042.noaux i8042.nomux i8042.nopnp i8042.dumbkbd root=/dev/vda3" \
        --disk path=/home/cathy/clear-31890-kvm.img   \
        --vhost-user-net "mac=52:54:20:11:C5:02,sock=/var/run/openvswitch/vhost-user2,num_queues=4" \

>         --rng

Reviewer 4: The comments above apply here too.

```

_Setup VM1_
```bash
# From inside the guest
sudo ip addr add 172.100.0.1/24 dev enp0s3
```

_Setup VM2_
```bash
# From inside the guest
sudo ip addr add 172.100.0.2/24 dev enp0s3
```

_Ping VM1 from VM2_
```bash
# From inside the guest
sudo ping 172.100.0.1
```

_Ping VM2 from VM1_
```bash
sudo ping 172.100.0.2
```

> __Result:__ At this point, VM1 and VM2 could ping each other successfully. Run iperf3 test then.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
__Result:__ At this point, VM1 and VM2 can ping each other successfully. We can now run `iperf3` test.
```
